HISTORICAL BACKGROUND 

The time period of about 500-1 100 AD in British history was characterized 
by foreign invasions and internal struggles. This resulted in the mixing of several 
races, tongues and cultures. 

After the Romans departed from the British Isles in 407 AD fighting 
continued between the Picts and the Scots who had lost their common enemy. 
The fifth century also saw conquests and the gradual occupation by Germanic 
tribes - Angles, Jutes and Saxons - who had moved north to Scandinavia and 
from there to Britain. Apart from making conquests, these tribes preferred 
agricultural life, had strong family and tribal ties, and were very loyal to their 
king or chief. The legendary King Arthur defeated the Saxons in 490 AD and for 
about a decade halted their advance. 

At the end of the sixth century, the Anglo-Saxons accepted Christianity 
after Pope Gregory sent Saint Augustine to Britain in 597 AD. (The Romans had 
introduced Christianity to the Celts centuries earlier.) This gave rise to some 
religious writings. 

At the end of the eighth century the Vikings (also known as Norsemen or 
Danes) invaded the country, easily overcame the local inhabitants, and plundered 
their estates. It was not until the reign of King Alfred the Great (871 -900) that 
their advance was stopped. With their acceptance of Christianity, the Danes 
partially blended in with the local people. 

Alfred's successors, Edgar and Ethelred II were in 1016 followed by Danish 
King Canute (reigned 1016-1035), after whose death the empire fell apart 
Alfred's great-grandson, Edward, son of the French Emma of Normandy, took 
over the throne. The fact that Edward had no descendants led to a power struggle 
between his brother-in-law, Harold, and Emma's nephew, William of Normandy. 
William's victory over Harold at the Battle of Hastings in 1066 led to the Norman 
conquest and occupation of England, which then opened a new chapter in British 
history. 

The language of this whole period (500-1100) is known as Old English. No 
exact date exists for its beginning. The first written records of the language date 
from around 690 AD (however, people had spoken it long before then). Most Old 



English words were Germanic, having come from the languages of the Angles, 
Jutes and Saxons. Latin, however, also had a strong influence on early English. 
Later, the Scandinavians (Vikings) contributed many words to Old English. By 
the end of the Old English period (marked by the Norman conquest), Old English 
had been established as a literary language with a remarkable polish and 
versatility. 

Old English literature consists of poetry, prose, charms, riddles, maxims, 
proverbs, and various other wisdom sayings. It is a mixture of pagan traditions, 
thoughts about life, the universe and nature, as well as Christian thought and 
moral values. There is often no clear-cut delineation between religious and 
non-religious poetry or sometimes even between poetry and prose. 

OLD ENGLISH POETRY 
